docs: add content to implementing/evaluations (#2073)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/implementing/evaluations.md

description: Understand Keptn evaluations and how to use them
weight: 150
---

> A `KeptnEvaluation` checks whether a `KeptnMetric` meets a defined target value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `KeptnEvaluation` checks whether a value in `KeptnMetric` meets a defined target value defined in `KeptnEvaluationDefinition`.
```

> A `KeptnEvaluation` resource is defined in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource is defined in a
```

or
[ReplicaSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/),
you must:

* Annotate your [Workloads](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)
  [Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/),
  [StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
  and
  [DaemonSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/)
  to include each evaluation and task you want to run
  pre- and post-deployment for the specific workloads.
* Manually edit all
  [KeptnApp](../yaml-crd-ref/app.md) resources
  to specify the evaluations to be run
  pre- and post-deployment for the `KeptnApp` itself.

See [Pre- and post-deployment checks](../implementing/integrate/#pre--and-post-deployment-checks)
for details.

Note the following:

* One `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource can include
  multiple `objective` fields that reference additional metrics.
  In this example, you might want to also query
  available memory, disk space, and other resources
  that are required for the deployment.
* The `KeptnMetric` resources that are referenced

>   in a `KeptnMetricDefinition` resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in a `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource
```

  can be defined on different namespaces in the cluster.
* All `KeptnEvaluation` resources
  that are defined by `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resources at the same level
  (either pre-deployment or post-deployment)

>   execute in parallel.

Reviewer: There is always only one evaluation running for a specific pre/post task, never more. Also KeptnEvaluation is not defined by KeptnEvaluationDefinition, but it's created according to the information that are defined in the KeptnEvaluationDefinition. In example you can think of it like a Definition describes what action needs to be done and the evaluation describes how this action was completed and with what kind of result

Author: Thanks for clarifying this -- I did misunderstand it, which made for all sorts of errors!  See if the new version is better.

Reviewer 2: @odubajDT maybe we need to clarify this "There is always only one evaluation running for a specific pre/post task, never more." users can specify a list of evaluation definitions to run as a list of strings in the app or workload level

Author: This was clarified in a slack conversation.  One `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` can include multiple objectives (which will be evaluated sequentially)  but you can also run multiple `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resources for the same stage and they will run in parallel.  I will correct the documentation.

you must:

* Annotate your `Workloads`
  to identify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource you want to run
  pre- and post-deployment for the specific workloads.
* Manually edit all
  [KeptnApp](../yaml-crd-ref/app.md) resources
  to specify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` to be run
  pre- and post-deployment evaluations for the `KeptnApp` itself.

See
[Pre- and post-deployment checks](../implementing/integrate/#pre--and-post-deployment-checks)
for details.

Note the following:

* One `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource can include
  multiple `objective` fields that reference additional metrics.
  In this example, you might want to also query
  available memory, disk space, and other resources
  that are required for the deployment.
* The `KeptnMetric` resources that are referenced
  in a `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource
  * can be defined on different namespaces in the cluster
  * can query different instances of different types of metric providers
* All objectives within a `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource
  are evaluated in order.
  If the evaluation of any objective fails,
  the `KeptnEvaluation` itself fails.

> * You can define multiple `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can define multiple evaluations
```

  [Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/),
  [StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
  and
  [DaemonSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/)
  to identify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource you want to run
  pre- and post-deployment for the specific workloads.
* Manually edit all
  [KeptnApp](../yaml-crd-ref/app.md) resources
  to specify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` to be run
  pre- and post-deployment for the `KeptnApp` itself.

See
[Pre- and post-deployment checks](../implementing/integrate/#pre--and-post-deployment-checks)
for details.

Note the following:

* One `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource can include
  multiple `objective` fields that reference additional metrics.
  In this example, you might want to also query
  available memory, disk space, and other resources
  that are required for the deployment.
* The `KeptnMetric` resources that are referenced
  in a `KeptnMetricDefinition` resource
  * can be defined on different namespaces in the cluster
  * can query different instances of different types of data providers

> * Each deployment has a single

Reviewer 2: As for task you can have a list of evaluation to be performed as pre and post.  see here you can have a list - https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/examples/sample-app/version-2/app.yaml#L17

Author: I think the proper terminology is that you can have only one "evaluation" (KeptnTaskDefinition) per stage, but that evaluation can have an unlimited number of `objectives`.  And I think this PR now reflects that but let me read it over one more time.

Reviewer 2: *KeptnEvaluationDefinitions can contain multiple objective yes, but an app pre-evaluaiton can be composed by multiple KeptnEvaluationDefinitions at least this is how I see it in the code 🤔

Author: Clarified in slack discussion and docs are now correct.

or
[ReplicaSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/replicaset/),
you must:

* Annotate your [Workloads](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)
  [Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/),
  [StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/),
  and
  [DaemonSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/)
  to identify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource you want to run
  pre- and post-deployment for the specific workloads.
* Manually edit all
  [KeptnApp](../yaml-crd-ref/app.md) resources
  to specify the `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` to be run
  pre- and post-deployment for the `KeptnApp` itself.

See
[Pre- and post-deployment checks](../implementing/integrate/#pre--and-post-deployment-checks)
for details.

Note the following:

* One `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource can include
  multiple `objective` fields that reference additional metrics.
  In this example, you might want to also query
  available memory, disk space, and other resources
  that are required for the deployment.
* The `KeptnMetric` resources that are referenced

>   in a `KeptnMetricDefinition` resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in a `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource
```

  * can be defined on different namespaces in the cluster

>   * can query different instances of different types of data providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * can query different instances of different types of metric providers
```

* All objectives within a `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource
  are evaluated in order.
  If the evaluation of an objective fails,
  the `KeptnEvaluation` itself fails

>   and the objectives listed after the failed objection

Reviewer: This is not true, all objectives in the list are evaluated in all circumstances even if one of the objective has failed

Author: Fixed -- thanks.

  are not evaluated.
* You can define multiple `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resources
  for each stage (pre- and post-deployment).

>   These evaluations run in parallel so the failure of one `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  These evaluations run in parallel so the failure of one evaluation
```

>   has no effect on whether other `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` resources are completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  has no effect on whether other evaluations are completed.
```

> * The results of each `KeptnEvaluationDefinition` execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The results of each evaluation
```

>   are written to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is written to a
```

description: Understand Keptn evaluations and how to use them
weight: 150
---

> A `KeptnEvaluation` is a `KeptnMetric` that has a defined target value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A `KeptnEvaluation` allows to check wether a `KeptnMetric` has a defined target value.
```

Author: Alas, "allows to check" is not valid English syntax.  It's a real shame, I know.  So I reworded this slightly -- see if this works

A `KeptnEvaluation` resource is defined in a
[KeptnEvaluationDefinition](../yaml-crd-ref/evaluationdefinition.md)
yaml file.
The example
[app-pre-deploy-eval.yaml](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/examples/sample-app/version-3/app-pre-deploy-eval.yaml)
file specifies the `app-pre-deploy-eval-2` evaluation as follows:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: instead of hardcoding yamls we could embed existing examples https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/lifecycle-operator/config/samples/lifecycle_v1alpha1_keptnevaluationdefinition.yaml
 
 so this will become: 
 
 {{< embed path="/lifecycle-operator/config/samples/lifecycle_v1alpha1_keptnevaluationdefinition.yaml" >}}

Author: Done, only I used the file under the examples folder using the v1alpha3 library.

apiVersion: lifecycle.keptn.sh/v1alpha3
kind: KeptnEvaluationDefinition
metadata:
  name: app-pre-deploy-eval-2
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  objectives:
    - keptnMetricRef:
        name: available-cpus
        namespace: podtato-kubectl
      evaluationTarget: ">4"`
```

The `evaluationTarget` is set to be `>4`,
so this evaluation ensures that more than 4 CPUs are available
before the workload or application is deployed.

The example
[metric.yaml](https://github.com/keptn/lifecycle-toolkit/blob/main/examples/sample-app/base/metric.yaml)
file defines the
[KeptnMetric](../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md) resource
that is named  `available-cpus`:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: same as above

Author: Done, using the file that goes with this evaluationdefinition.

apiVersion: metrics.keptn.sh/v1alpha3
kind: KeptnMetric
metadata:
  name: available-cpus
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  provider:
    name: my-provider
  query: "sum(kube_node_status_capacity{resource='cpu'})"
  fetchIntervalSeconds: 10
```

To integrate your `KeptnEvaluation` resource, you must:

> * Annotate your [Workloads](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)

Reviewer 2: maybe we could rephrase this block reordering the sentences so that is easier to understand, what about: 

to run evaluation on your app you must: ...

to run evaluation on one of your workloads/daemosets/etc you must: ...

Author: That definitely reads better -- done!
